---
layout: "post"
title:  "Linkers"
date:   "2026-04-09 14:23:35 +0530"
categories: linkers
--- 

## What does a linker do?

It's simple: a linker converts object files into executables and shared libraries. Let's look at what that means. For cases where a linker is used, the software development process consists of writing program code in some language: e.g, C or C++ or Fortran (but typically no Java, as Java normally works differently, using a loader rather than a linker). A compiler translates this program code, which is human readable text, into another form of human readable text know as assembly code. Assembly code is a readable form of the machine language which the computer can execute directly. An assembler is used to turn this assembly code into an object file. For completeness, I'll node that some compilers include an assembler internally, and produce an object file directly. Either way, this is where things get interesting.

In the old days, when dinosaurs roamed the data centers, many programs were complete in themselves. In those days there was generally no compiler-people wrote directly in assembly code-and the assembler actually generated an executable file which the machine could execute directly. As language liked Fortran and Cobol started to appear, people began to think in terms of libraries of subroutines, which meant that there has to be some way to run the assembler at two different times, and combine the output into a single executable file. This required the assembler to generate a different type of output, which became known as an object (I have no idea where this name came from). And a new program was required to combine different object files together into a single executable. This new program became known as the linker (the source of this name should be obvious).

Linkers still do the same job today. In the decades that followed, one new feature has been added: shared libraries.

Shared libraries were invented as an optimization for virtual memory systems running many processes simultaneously. People noticed that there is a set of basic functions which appear in almost every program. Before shared libraries, in a system which runs multiple processes simultaneously, that meant that almost every process had a copy of exactly the same code. This suggested that on a virtual memory system it would be possible to arrange that code so that code so that a single copy could be shared by every process using it. The virtual memory system would be used to map the single copy into the address space of each process which needed it. This would require less physical memory to run multiple programs, and thus yield better performance.

I believe the first implementation of shared libraries was on SVR3, based on COFF. This implementation was simple, and basically assigned each shared library a fixed portion of the virtual address space. This did not require any significant changes to the linker. However, requiring each shared library to reserve an appropriate portion of the virtual address space was inconvenient.

SunOS4 introduced a more flexible version of shared libraries, which was later picked up by SVR4. This implementation postponed some of the operation of the linker to runtime. When the program started, it would automatically run a limited version of the linker which would link the program proper with the shared libraries. The version of the linker which runs when the program starts is known as the dynamic linker. When it is necessary to distinguish them, I will refer to the version of the linker which creates the program as the program linker. This type of shared libraries was a significant change to the traditional program linker: it now has to build linking information which could be used efficiently at runtime by the dynamic linker.

That is the end of the introduction. You should now understand the basics of what a linker does. I will now turn to how it does it.

## Basic Linker Data Types

The linker operates on a small number of basic data types: symbols, relocations and contents. These are defined in the input object files. Here is an overview of each of these.

A symbol is basically a name and a value. Many symbols represents static objects in the original source code-that is, objects which exist in a single place for the duration of the program. For example, in an object file generated from C code, there will be a symbol for each function and for each global and static variable. The value of such a symbol is simply an offset into the contents. The type of symbol is known as a defined symbol. It's important not to confuse the value of the symbol representing the variable my_global_var with the value of my_global_var itself. The value of the symbol is roughly the address of the variable: the value you would get from the expression &my_global_var in C.

Symbols are also used to indicate a reference to a name defined in a different object file. Such a reference is known as an undefined symbol. There are other less commonly used types of which I will describe later.

During the linking process, the linker will assign an address to each defined symbol, and will resolve each undefined symbol by finding a defined symbol with the same name.

A relocation is a computation to perform on the contents. Most relocations refer to a symbol and to an offset within the contents. Many relocations will also provide an additional operand, known as the addend. A simple and commonly used, relocation is "set this location in the contents to the value of this symbol plus this addend". The types of computations that relocations do are inherently dependent on the architecture of the processor for which the linker is generating code. For example, RISC processors which require two or more instructions to form a memory address will have separate relocations to be used with each of those instruction; for example, "set this location in the contents to the lower 16 bits of the value of this symbol".

During the linking process, the linker will perform all of the relocation computation as directed. A relocation is an object file may refer to an undefined symbol.If the linker is unable to resolve that symbol, it will normally issue an error(but not always; for some symbol types or some relocation types an error may not be appropriate).

The contents are what memory should look like during the execution of the program. Contents have a size, an array of bytes, and a type. They contain the machine code generated by the compiler and assembler (know as text). They contain the value of initialized variables (data). They contain static unnamed data like string constants and switch tables (read-only data or rdata). They contain uninitialized variables, in which case the array of bytes is generally omitted and assumed to contain only zeroes (bss). The compiler and the assembler work hard to generate exactly the right contents, but the linker really doesn't care about them except as raw data. The linker reads the contents from each file, concatenates them all together sorted by type, applies the relocations, and writes the result into the executable file.


Basic Linker operation

At this point we already know enough to understand the basic steps used by every linker.

* Read the input object files. Determine the length and type of the contents. Read the symbols.
* Build a symbol table containing all the symbols, linking undefined symbols to their definitions.
* Decide where all the contents should go in the output executable file, which means deciding where they should go in memory when the program runs.
* Read the contents data and the relocations. Apply the relocations to the contents. Write the result to the output file.
* Optionally write out the complete symbol table with the final values of the symbols.


## Address Spaces

An address space is simply a view of memory, in which each byte has an address. The linker deals with three distinct types of address space. 

Every input object file is a small address space: the contents have addresses, and the symbols and relocations refer to the contents by addresses.

The output program will be placed at some location in memory when it runs. This is the output address space, which I generally refer to as using virtual memory address.

The output program will be loaded at some location in memory. This is the load memory address. On typical Unix systems virtual memory addresses and load memory addresses are the same. On embedded systems they are often different; for example, the initialized data (the initial contents of global or static variables) may be loaded into ROM at the load memory address, and then copied into RAM at the virtual memory address.

Shared libraries can normally be run at different virtual memory address in different processes. A shared library has a base address when it is created; this is often simply zero. When the dynamic linker copies the shared library into the virtual memory space of a process, it must apply relocations to adjust the share library to run at its virtual memory address. Shared library systems minimizes the number of relocations which must be applied, since they take time when starting the program.

## Object File Formats

As I said above, an assembler turns human readable assembly language into an object file. An object file is a binary data file written in a format designed as input to the linker. The linker generates an executable file. This executable file is a binary data file written in a format designed as input for the operating system or the loader (this is true even when linking dynamically, as normally the operating system loads the executable before invoking the dynamic linker to begin running the program). There is no logical requirements that the object file format resemble the executable file format. However, in practice they are normally very similar.

Most object file formats define sections. A section typically holds memory contents, or it may be used to hold other types of data. Sections generally have a name, a type, a size, an address, and an associated array of data.

Object file formats may be classed in two general types: record oriented and section oriented.

A record oriented object file format defines a series of records of varying size. Each record starts with some special code, and may be followed by data. Reading the object file requires reading it from the beginning and processing each record. Records are use to describe symbols and sections. Relocations may be associated with sections or may be specified by other records. IEEE-695 and Mack-O are record oriented object files formats used today.

In a section oriented object file format the file header describes a section table with a specified number of sections. Symbols may appear in a separate part of the object file described by the file header, or they may appear in a special section. Relocations may be attached to sections, or they may appear in separate sections. The object file may be read by reading the section table, and then reading specific sections directly. ELF, COFF, PR and a.out are section oriented object file format.

Every object file format needs to be able to represent debugging information. Debugging information's is generated by the compiler and read by the debugger. In general the linker can just treat it like any other type of data. However, in practice the debugging information for a program can be larger than the actual program itself. The linker can use various techniques to reduce the amount of debugging information, thus reducing the size of the executable. This can speed up the link, but requires the linker to understand the debugging information.

The a.out object file format stores debugging information using special strings in the symbol table, known as stabs. These special strings are simply the names of symbols with a special type. This technique is also used by some variants of ECOFF, and by older version of MACH-O.

The COFF object file format stores debugging information using special fields in the symbol table. This type information is limited, and is completely inadequate for C++. A common technique to work around these limitation is to embed stabs strings in a COFF section.

The ELF object file format stores debugging information in sections with special names. The debugging information can be stabs strings or the DWARF debugging format.

## Shared Libraries

We've talked a bit about what object files and executables look like, so what do shared libraries look like? I'm going to focus on ELF shared libraries as used in SVR4 (and GNU/Linux etc), as they are the most flexible shared library implementation and the one I know best.

Windows shared libraries, known as DLLs, are less flexible in that you have to compile code differently depending on whether it will go into a shared library or not. You also have to express symbol visibility in the source code. This is not inherently bad, and indeed ELF has picked up some of these ideas over time, but the ELF format makes more decisions at link time and is thus more powerful.

When the program linker creates a shared library, it does not yet know which virtual address that shared library will run at. In fact, in different processes, the same shared library will run at different address, depending on the decisions made by the dynamic linker. This means that shared library code must be position independent. More precisely, it must be position independent after the dynamic linker has finished loading it. It is always possible for the dynamic linker to convert any piece of code to run at any virtual address, given sufficient relocation information. However, performing the relocation computations must be done every time the program starts, implying that it will start more slowly. Therefore, any shared library system seeks to generate position independent code which requires a minimal number of relocations to be applied at runtime, while still running at close to the runtime efficiency of position dependent code.

An additional complexity is that ELF shared libraries were designed to be roughly equivalent to ordinary archives. This means that by default the main executable may override symbols in the shared library, such that references in the shared library will call the definition in the executable, even if the shared library also defines that same symbol. For example, an executable may define its own version of malloc. The C library also defines malloc, and the C library contains code which calls malloc. If the executable defines malloc itself, it will override the function in the C library. When some other function in the C library calls malloc, it will call the definition in the executable, not the definition in the C library.

There are thus different requirements pulling in different directions for any specific ELF implementation. THe right implementation choices will depend on the characteristics of the processor. That said, most, but not all, processors make fairly similar decisions. I will describe the common case here. An example of a processor which uses the common case is the i386; an example of a processor which make some different decision is the PowerPC.

In the common case, code may be compiled in tow different modes. By default, code is position independent. Putting position dependent code into a shared library will cause the program linker to generate a lot of relocation information, and cause the dynamic linker to do a lot of processing at runtime. Code may also be compiled in position independent mode, typically with the -fpic option. Position independent code is slightly slower when it calls a non-static function or refers to a global or static variable. However, it requires much less relocation information, and thus the dynamic linker will start the program faster.

Position independent code will call non-static functions via the Procedure Linkage Table or PLT. The PLT does not exist in .o files. In a .o file, use of the PLT is indicated by a special relocation. When the program linker processes such a relocation, it will create an entry in the PLT. It will adjust the instruction such that it become a PC-relative call to the PLT entry. PC-relative call to the PLT entry. PC-relative calls are inherently position independent and thus do not require a relocation entry themselves. The program linker will create a relocation for the PLT entry which tells the dynamic linker which symbol is associated with that entry. This process reduces the number of dynamic relocations in the shared library from one per function call to one per function called.

Further, PLT entries are normally relocated lazily by the dynamic linker. On most ELF systems this laziness may be overridden by setting the LD_BIND_NODE environment variable when running the program. However, by default, the dynamic linker will not actually apply a relocation to the PLT until some code actually calls the function in question. This also speeds up startup time, in that many invocations of a program will not call every possible function. This is particularly true when considering the shared C library, which has many more function calls than any typical program will execute.

In order to make this work, the program linker initializes the PLT entries to load an index into some register or push it on the stack, and then to branch to common code. The common code calls back into the dynamic linker, which uses the index to find the appropriate PLT relocation, and uses that to find the function being called. The dynamic linker then initializes the PLT entry with the address of the function, and then jumps to the code of the function. The next time the function is called, the PLT entry will branch directly to the function.

Before giving an example, I will talk about the other major data structure in the position independent code, the Global Offset Table or GOT. This is used for global and static variables. For every reference to a global variable from position independent code, the compiler will generate a load from the GOT to get the address of the variable, followed by a second load to get the actual value of the variable. The address of the GOT will normally be held in a register, permitting efficient access. Like the PLT, the GOT does not exist in a .o file, but is created by the program linker. The program linker will create the dynamic relocations which the dynamic linker will use to initialize GOT at runtime. Unlike the PLT, the dynamic linker always fully initializes the GOT when the program starts.

For example, on the i386, the address of the GOT is held in the register %ebx. This register is initialized at the entry to each function in position independent code. The initialization sequence varies from one compiler to another, but typically looks something like this:

```
call __i686.get_pc_thunk.bx
add $offset,%ebx
```
The function `__i686.get_pc_thunk.bx` simply looks like this:

```
move (%esp), %ebx
ret
```

This sequence of instructions uses a position independent sequence to get the address at which it is running. Then it uses an offset to get the address of the GOT. Note that this requires that the GOT always be a fixed offset from the code, regardless of where the shared library is loaded. That is, the dynamic linker must load the shared library as a fixed unit; it may not load different parts at varying addresses.

Global and static variables are now read or written by first loading the address via a fixed offset from %ebx. The program linker will create dynamic relocations for each entry in the GOT, telling the dynamic linker how to initialize the entry. These relocations are of type GLOB_DAT.

For function calls, the program linker will set up a PLT entry to look like this:

```
jmp *offset(%ebx)
pushl #index
jmp first_plt_entry
```

The program linker will allocate an entry in the GOT for each entry in the PLT. It will create a dynamic relocation for the GOT entry of type JMP_SLOT. It will initialize the GOT entry to the base address of the shared library plus the address of the second instruction in the code sequence above. When the dynamic linker does the initial lazy binding on a JMP_SLOT relocation, it will simply add the difference between the share library load address and the shared library base address to the GOT entry. The effect is that the first jmp instruction will jump to the second instruction, which will push the index entry and branch to the first PLT entry. The first PLT entry is special, and looks like this:

```
pushl 4(%ebx)
jmp *8(%ebx)
```

This references the second and third entries in the GOT. The dynamic linker will initialize them to have appropriate values for a callback into the dynamic linker itself. The dynamic linker will use the index pushed by the first code sequence to find the JMP_SLOT relocation. When the dynamic linker determines the function to be called, it will store the address of the function into the GOT entry references by the first code sequence. Thus, the next time the function is called, the jmp instruction will branch directly to the right code.

That was a fast pass over a lot of details, but I hope that it conveys the main idea. It means that for position independent code on the i386, every call to a global function requires one extra instruction after the first time it is called. Every reference to a global or static variable requires one extra instruction. Almost every function uses four extra instructions when it starts to initialize %ebx (leaf functions which do not refer to any global variables do not need to initialize %ebx). This all has some negative impact on the program cache. This is the runtime performance penalty paid to let the dynamic linker start the program quickly.

On other processors, the details are naturally different. However, the general flavour is similar: position independent code in a shared library starts faster and runs slightly slower.

## Shared Libraries Redux

How linkers implement shared libraries. This discussion will again be ELF specific.

When the program linker puts position dependent code into a shared library, it has to copy more of the relocations from the object file into the shared library. They will become dynamic relocations computed by the dynamic linker at runtime. Some relocations do not have to be copied; for example, a PC relative relocation to a symbol which is local to shared library can be fully resolved by the program linker, and does not require a dynamic relocation. However, not that a PC relative relocation to a global symbol does require a dynamic relocation; otherwise, the main executable would not be able to override the symbol. SOme relocations have to exist in the shared library, but do not need to be actual copies of the relocations in the object file; for example, a relocation which computes the absolute address of symbol which is local to the shared library can often be replaced with a RELATIVE reloc, which simply directs the dynamic linker to add the difference between the shared library's load address and its bas address. The advantage of using a RELATIVE reloc is that the dynamic linker can compute it quickly at runtime, because it does not require determining the value of a symbol.

For position independent code, the program linker has a harder job. The compiler and assembler will co-operate to generate special relocations for position independent code. Although details differ among processors, there will typically be a PLT relocation and a GOT relocation. These relocations will direct the program linker to add an entry to the PLT or the GOT, as well as performing some computation. For example, on the i386 a function call in position independent coe will generate a R_386_PLT32 relocation. This relocation will refer to a symbol as usual. It will direct the program linker to add a PLT entry for that symbol, if one does not already exist. The computation of the relocation is then a PC-relative reference to the PLT entry. (The 32 in the name of the relocation refers to the size of reference, which is 32 bits). Yesterday I described how on the i386 every PLT entry also has a corresponding GOT entry, so the R_386_PLT32 relocation actually directs the program linker to create both a PLT entry and a GOT entry.

When the program linker creates an entry in the PLT or the GOT, it must also generate a dynamic reloc to tell the dynamic linker about the entry. This will typically be a JMP_SLOT or GLOB_DaT relocation.

This all means that the program linker must keep track of the PLT entry and the GOT entry for each symbol. Initially, of course, there will be no such entries. When the linker sees a PLT or GOT relocation, it must check whether the symbol referenced by the relocation already has a PLT or GOT entry, and create one if it does not. Note that it is possible for a single symbol to have both a PLT entry and a GOT entry; this will happen for position independent code which both calls a function and also takes its address.

The dynamic linker's job for the PLT and GOT tables is to simply compute the JMP_SLOT and GLOB_DAT relocations at runtime. The main complexity here is the lazy evaluation of PLT entries.

The fact that C permits taking the address of a function introduces an interesting wrinkle. In C you are permitted to take the address of a function, and you are permitted to compare that address to another function address. The problem is that if you take the address of a function in a shared library, the natural result would be to get the address of the PLT entry. After all, that is address to which a call to the function will jump. However, each shared library has its own PLT, and thus the address of a particular function differ in each shared library. That means that comparisons of functions pointers generated in different shared libraries may be different when they should be the same. This is not purely hypothetical problem; when I did a port which got it wrong, before I fixed the bug I saw failures in the Tcl shared library when it compared function pointers.

The fix for this bug on most processors is a special marking for a symbol which has a PLT entry but is not defined. Typically the symbol will be marked as undefined, but a non-zero value that value will be set to the address of the PLT entry. When the dynamic linker is searching for the value of a symbol to use for a relocation other than a JMP_SLOT relocation, if it finds such a specially marked symbol, it will use the non-zero value. This will ensure that all references to the symbol which are not function calls will use the same value. To make this work, the compiler and assembler must make sure that any reference to a function which does not involve calling it will not carry a standard PLT relocation. This special handling of function addresses needs to be implemented in both the program linker and the dynamic linker.

## ELF Symbol

Ok, enough about shared libraries. Let's go over ELF symbols in more details. I'm not going to layout exact data structures go to the ELF ABI for that. I am going to talk about the different fields and what they mean. Many of the different types of ELF symbols are also used by other file formats, but we won't cover that.

An entry in an ELF symbol table has eight pieces of information: a name, a value, a size, a section, a binding, a type, a visibility, and undefined additional information (currently there are six undefined bits, though more may be added). An ELF symbol defined in a shared object may also have an associate version name,

The name is obvious.

For an ordinary defined symbol, the section is some section in the file (specifically, the symbol table entry holds an index into the section table). For an object file the value is relative to the start of the section. For an executable the value is an absolute address. For a shared library the value is relative to the base address.

For an undefined reference symbol, the section index is the special value SHN_UNDEF which has the value 0. A section index of SHN_ABS (0xfff1) indicates that the value of the symbol is an absolute value, not relative to any section.

A section index of SHN_COMMON(0xfff2) indicates a common symbol. Common symbols were invented to handle Fortran common blocks, and they are also often used for uninitialized global variables in C. A common symbol has unusual semantics. Common symbols have a value of zero, but set the size field to the desired size. If one object file has a common symbol and another has a definition, the common symbol is treated as an undefined reference. If there is no definition for a common symbol, the program linker acts as though it saw a definition initialized to zero of the appropriate size. Two object files may have common symbols of different sizes, in which case the program linker will use the largest size. Implementing common symbol semantics across shared libraries is a touchy subject, somewhat helped by the recent introduction of a type for common symbols as well as a special section index (see the discussion of symbol types below).

The size of an ELF symbol, other than a common symbol, is the size of the variable or function. This is mainly used for debugging purpose.

The binding of an elf symbol is global, local, or weak. A global symbol is globally visible. A local symbol is only locally visible (e.g., a static function). Weak symbols come in two flavors. A weak undefined reference is like an ordinary undefined reference, except that it is not an error if a relocation refers to a weak undefined reference symbol which has no defining symbol. Instead, the relocation is computed as though the symbol has the value zero.

A weak defined symbol is permitted to be linked with a non-weak defined symbol of the same name without causing a multiple definition error. Historically there are two ways for the program linker to handle a weak defined symbol. On SVR4 if the program linker sees a weak defined symbol followed by a non-weak defined symbol with the same name, it will issue a multiple definition error. However, a non-weak defined symbol followed by a weak defined symbol will not cause an error. On solaris, a weak defined symbol followed by a non-weak defined symbol is handled by causing all references to attach to the non-weak defined symbol, with no error. This difference in behavior is due to an ambiguity in the ELF ABI which was read differently by different people. The GNU linker follows the Solaris behavior.

The type of an ELF symbol is one of the following:

* STT_NOTYPE: no particular type
* STT_OBJECT: a data object, such as a variable
* STT_FUNC: a function
* STT_SECTION: a local symbol associated with a section. This type of symbol is used to reduce the number of local symbols required, byt changing all relocations against local symbols in a specific section to use STT_SECTION symbol instead.
* STT_FILE: a special symbol whose name is the name of the source file which produced the object file.
* STT_COMMON: a common symbol. This is the same as setting the section index to SHN_COMMON, except in a shared object. The program linker will normally have allocated space for the common symbol in the shared object, so it will have a real section index. The STT_COMMON type tells the dynamic linker that although the symbol has a regular definition, it is a common symbol.
* STT_TLS: a symbol in the Thread Local Storage area.

ELF symbol visibility was invented to provide more control over which symbols were accessible outside a shared library. The basic idea is that a symbol may be global within a shared library, but local outside the shared library.

* STV_DEFAULT: the usual visibility rules apply: global symbols are visible everywhere.
* STV_INTERVAL: the symbol is not accessible outside the current executable or shared library
* STV_HIDDEN: the symbol is not visible outside the current executable or shared library, but it may be accessed indirectly, probably because some code took its address.
* STV_PROTECTED: the symbol is visible outside the current executable or shared object, but it may not be overridden. That is, if a protected symbol in a shared library is referenced by other code in the shared library, that other code will always reference the symbol in the shared library, even if the executable defines a symbol with the same name.

## Relocations

A relocation is a computation to perform on the contents. A relocation can also direct the linker to take other actions, like creating a PLT or GOT entry. Let's take a closer look at the computation.

In general a relocation has a type, a symbol, an offset into the contents, and an addend.

From the linker's point of view, the contents are simply an uninterpreted series of bytes. A relocation changes those bytes as necessary to produce the correct final executable. For example, consider the C code g = 0; where g is a global variable. On the i386, the compiler will turn this into an assembly language instruction, which will most likely be movl $0, g(for position dependent code - position independent code would loading the address of g from the GOT). Now, the g in the C code is a global variable, and we all more or less know what that means. The g in the assembly code is not that variable. It is a symbol which holds the address of that variable.

The assembler does not know the address of the global variable g, which is another way of saying that the assembler does not know the value of the symbol g. It is the linker that is going to pick that address. So the assembler has to tell the linker that it needs to use the address of g in this instruction. The way the assembler does this is to create a relocation. We don't use a separate relocation type for each instruction; instead, each processor will have a natural set of relocation types which are appropriate for the machine architecture. Each type of relocation expresses a specific computation.

In the i386 case, the assembler will generate these bytes:

c7 05 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00

The c7 05 are the instruction (movl constant to address). The first four 00 bytes are the 32-bit constant 0. The second four 00 bytes are the address. The assembler tells the linker to put the value of the symbol g into those four bytes by generating (int this case) a R_386_32 relocation. For this relocation the symbol will be g, the offset will be to the last four bytes of the instruction, the type will be R_386_32, and the addend will be 0 (in the case of the i386 the addend is stored in the contents rather than in the relocation itself). The type R_386_32 expresses a specific computation, which is: put the 32-but sum of the value of the symbol and the addend into the offset. Since for the i386 the addend is stored in the contents, this can also be expressed as: add the value of the symbol to the 32-bit field at the offset. When the linker performs this computation, the address in the instruction will be the address of the global variable g. Regardless of the details, the important point to note is that the relocation adjusts the contents by applying a specific computation selected by the type.

An example of a simple case which does use an addend would be

```
char a[10]; // A global array
char* p = &a[1]; // In a function
```
The assignment to p will wind up requiring a relocation for the symbol a. Here the addend will be 1, so that the resulting instruction references a + 1 rather than a + 0.

To point out how relocations are processor dependent, let's consider g = 0; on a RISC processor: the PowerPC(in 32-bit mode). In this case, multiple assembly language instructions are required:

```
li 1, 0 // Set register 1 to 0
lis 9, g@ha // Load high-adjusted part of g into register 9
stw 1, g@l(9) // Store register 1 to address in register 9
plus low adjusted part g
```

The lis instruction loads a value into the upper 16bits of register 9, setting the lower 16 bits to zero. The stw instruction adds a signed 16bit value to register 9 to form an address, and then stores the value of register 1 at that address. The @hapart of the operand directs the assembler to generate a R_PPC_ADDR16_HA relocation. The @l produces a R_PPC_ADDR16_L0 relocation. The goal of these relocations is to compute the value of the symbol g and use it as the store address.

That is enough information to determine the computations performed by these relocations. The R_PPC_ADDR16_HA relocation computes ( SYMBOL >> 16) + ((SYMBOL & 0x8000) ? 1 : 0). The R_PPC_ADDR16_LO computes SYMBOL & 0xffff. The extra computation for R_PPC_ADDR16_HA is because of the stw instruction adds the signed 16-bit value, which means that if the low 16 bits appear negative we have to adjust the hight 16bits accordingly. The offsets of the relocations are such that the 16-bit resulting values are stored into the appropriate parts of the machine instructions.

The specific examples of relocations are ELF specific, but the same sorts of relocations occur for any object file format.

The examples shown are for relocations which appear in an object file. These types of relocations may also appear in a shared library, if they are copied there by the program linker. In ELF, there are also specific relocation types which never appear in object files but only appear in shared libraries or executables. These are the JMP_SLOT, GLOB_DAT and RELATIVE relocations discussed earlier. Another type of relocation which only appears in an executable is a COPY relocation.

## Position Dependent Shared Libraries

The important reasons that ELF shared libraries use PLT and GOT tables. The idea of a shared library is to permit mapping the same shared library into different processes. This only works at maximum efficiency if the shared library code looks the same in each process. If it does not look the same, then each process will need its own private copy, and the saving in physical memory and sharing will be lost.

When the dynamic linker loads a shared library which contains position dependent code, it must apply a set of dynamic relocations. These relocations will change the code in the shared library, and it will no longer be sharable.

The advantage of the PLT and GOT is that they move the relocations elsewhere, to the PLT and GOT tables themselves. Those tables can then be put into a read -write part of the shared library. This part of the shared library will be much smaller that the code. The PLT and GOT tables will be different in each process using the shared library, but the code will be the same.

What linkers do is basically simple, but the details can get complicated. The complexity is because smart programmers can see small optimizations to speed up their programs a little bit, and sometimes the only place those optimizations can be implemented is the linker. Each such optimizations makes the linker a little more complicated. At the same time, of course, the linker has to run as fast as possible, since nobody wants to sit around waiting for it to finish. 

## Thread local storage

It is often helpful to hae a global variable which can take on a different value in each thread. That is, the variable is global to the program, but the specific value is local to the thread. If thread A sets the local variable to 1, and thread B then sets it to 2, the code running in thread A will continue to see the value 1 for the variable while code running in thread B sees the value 2. In Posix threads this type of variable can be created via pthread_key_create and accessed via pthread_getspecific and pthread_setspecific.

Those functions work well enough, but making a function call for each access is awkward and inconvenient. It would be more useful if you could just declare a regular global variable and make it as thread local. That is the idea of thread local storage (TLS). On a system which supports TLS, any global (or static) variable may be annotated with _thread. The variable is then thread local.

Clearly this requires support from the compiler. It also requires support from the program linker and the dynamic linker. For maximum efficiency and why do this if you aren't going to get maximum efficiency? some kernel support is also needed. The design of TLS on ELF systems fully supports shared libraries, including having multiple shared libraries, and the executable itself, use the same name to refer to a single TLS variable. TLS variables can be initialized. Programs can take the address of a TLS variable, and pass the pointers between threads, so the address of a TLS variable is a dynamic value and must be globally unique.

How is this all implemented? First step: define different storage models for TLS variables.

* Global Dynamic: Fully general access to TLS variables from an executable or a shared object.
* Local Dynamic: Permits access to a variable which is bound locally within the executable or shared object from which it is referenced. This is true for all static TLS variables, for example. It is also true for protected symbols.
* Initial Executable: Permits access to a variable which is known to be part of the TLS image of the executable. This is true for all TLS variables defined in the executable itself, and all TLS variable defined in shared library explicitly linked with an executable. This is not true for access from a shared library, nor for access to TLS variable defined in shared libraries opened by dlopen
* Local Executable: Permits access to TLS variables defined in the executable itself.

These storage models are defined in decreasing order of flexibility. Now, for efficiency and simplicity, a compiler which supports TLS will permit the developer to specify the appropriate TLS model to use (with gcc, this is done with the -ftls-model option, although the Global Dynamic and Local Dynamic models also require using -fpic). So, when compiling code which will be in an executable and never be in a shared library, the developer may choose to set the TLS storage model to initial Executable.

Of course, in practice, developers often do not know where code will be used. And developers may not be aware of the intricacies of TLS models. The program linker, on the other hand, knows whether it is creating an executable or a shared library, and it knows whether the TLS variable is defined locally. So the program linker gets the job of automatically optimizing references to TLS variables when possible. These references take the form of relocations, and the linker optimizes the references by changing the code in various ways.

The program linker is also responsible for gathering all TLS variable together into a single TLS segment. The dynamic linker has to group together the TLS segments of the executable and all included shared libraries, resolve the dynamic TLS relocations, and has to build TLS segments dynamically when dlopen is used. The kernel has to make it possible for access to the TLS segments be efficient.

That was all pretty general. Let's do an example, again for i386 ELF. These are three different implementations of i386 ELF TLS; I am going to look at the gnu implementation. Consider this trivial code:

```
__thread int i;
int foo() { return i; }
```

In global dynamic mode, this generates i386 assembler code like this:

```
leal i@TLSGD(, %ebx, 1) %eax
call ___tls_get_addr@PLT
movl (%eax), %eax
```
%ebx holds the address of the GOT table. The first instruction will have a R_386_TLS_GD relocation for the variable i; the relocation will apply to the offset of the leal instruction. When the program linker sees this relocation, it will create two consecutive entries in the GOT table for the TLS variable i. The first one will get a R_386_TLS_DTPMOD32 dynamic relocation, and the second will get a R_386_TLS_DTPOFF32 dynamic relocation. The dynamic linker will set the DTPMOD32 GOT entry to hold the module ID of the object which defines the variable. The module ID is an index within the dynamic linker's tables which identifies the executable or a specific shared library. The dynamic linker's tables which identifies the executable or a specific shared library. The dynamic linker will set the DTPOFF32 GOT entry to the offset within the TLS segment for that module. The __tls_get_addr function will use those values to compute the address (this function also takes care of lazy allocation of TLS variables, which is a further optimization specific to the dynamic linker). Note that __tls_get_addr is actually implemented by the dynamic linker itself; it follows that global dynamic TLS variables are not supported (and not necessary) in statically linked executables.

At this point you are probably wondering what is so inefficient about pthread_getspecific. The real advantage of TLS shows when you see what the program linker can do. The leal; call sequence shown above is canonical: the compiler will always generate the same sequence to access a TLS variable in global dynamic mode. The program linker takes advantage of that fact. If the program linker sees that the code shown above is going into an executable, it knows that the access does not have to be treated as global dynamic; it can be treated as initial executable. The program linker will actually rewrite the code to look like this:

```
movl %gs:0,%eax
subl $i@TPOFF,%eax
```
Here i@TPOFF is simply the known offset of i within the TLS segment.

When a executable accesses a TLS variable which is defined in that executable, it requires two instructions to compute the address, typically followed by another one to actually load or store the value. That is significantly more efficient than calling pthread_getspecific. Admittedly, when a shared library accesses a TLS variable, the result is not much better than pthread_getspecific, but it shouldn't be any worse, either. And the code using thread is much easier to write and to read.

That was a real whirlwind tour. There are three separate but related TLS implementations on i386 (known as sun, gnu and gnu2), and 23 different relocation types are defined. Is TLS worth the additional complexity in the program linker and the dynamic linker? Since those tools are used for every program, and since the C standard global variable errno is particular can be implemented using TLS, the answer is most likely yes.


## ELF Segments

Earlier I said that executable file formats were normally the same as object file formats. That is true for ELF, but with a twist. In ELF, object files are composed of sections: all the data in the file is accessed via the section table. Executables and shared libraries normally contain a section table, which is used by programs like nm. But the operating system and the dynamic linker do not use the section table. Instead, they use the segment table, which provides an alternative view of the file.

All the contents of an ELF executable or shared library which are to be loaded into memory are contained within a segment (an object file does not have segments). A segment has a type, some flags, a file offset, a virtual address, a physical address, a file size, a memory size, and an alignment. The file offset points to a contiguous set of bytes which are the contents of the segment, the bytes to load into memory. When the operating system or the dynamic linker loads a file, it will do so by walking through the segments and loading them into memory (typically by using the mmap system call). All the information needed by the dynamic linker-the dynamic relocations, the dynamic symbol table, etc - are accessed via information stored in special segment.

Although an ELF executable or shared library does not, strictly speaking require any sections, they normally do have them. The contents of a loadable section will fall entirely within a single segment.

The program linker reads sections from the input object files. It sorts and concatenates them into sections in the output file. It maps all the loadable sections into segments in the output file. It lays out the section contents in the out file segments respecting alignment and access requirements, so that the segments may be mapped directly into memory. The sections are mapped to segments based on the access requirements: normally all the read only sections are mapped to one segment and all the writable sections are mapped to another segment. The address of the latter segment will be set so that it starts on a separate page in memory, permitting mmap to set different permissions on the mapped pages.

The segment flags are a bitmask which define access requirements. The defined flags are PF_R, PF_W and PF_X, which mean, respectively, that the contents must be readable, writable, or executable.

The segment virtual address is the memory address at which the segment contents are loaded at runtime. The physical address is officially undefined, but is often used as the load address when using a system which does not use virtual memory. The file size is the size of the contents in the file. The memory size may be larger than the file size when the segment contains uninitialized data; the extra bytes will be filled with zeroes. The alignment of the segment is mainly informative, as the address is already specified.


The ELF segment types are as follows:

* PT_NULL: A null entry in the segment table, which is ignored.
* PT_LOAD: A loadable entry in the segment table. The operating system or dynamic linker load all segments of this type. All other segments with contents will have their contents contained completely within a PT_LOAD segment.
* PT_DYNAMIC: The dynamic segment. This points to a series of dynamic tags which the dynamic linker uses to find the dynamic symbol table, dynamic relocations, and other information that it needs.
* PT_INTERP: The interpreter segment. This appears in an executable. The operating system uses it to find the name of the dynamic linker to run for the executable. Normally all executables will have the same interpreter name, but on some operating systems different interpreters are used in different emulation modes.
* PT_NOTE: A note segment. This contains system dependent note information which may be used by the operating system or the dynamic linker. On GNU/Linux systems shared libraries often have a ABI tag note which may be used to specify the minimum version of the kernel which is required for the shared library. The dynamic linker uses this when selecting among different shared libraries.
* PT_SHLIB: This is not used as far as I know.
* PT_PHDR: This indicates the address and size of the segment table. This is not too useful in practice as you have to have already found the segment table before you can find this segment.
* PT_TLS: The TLS segment. This holds the initial values for TLS variables.
* PT_GNU_EH_FRAME (0x6474e550): A GNU extension used to hold a sorted table of unwind information. This table is built by the GNU program linker. It is used by gcc’s support library to quickly find the appropriate handler for an exception, without requiring exception frames to be registered when the program start.
* PT_GNU_STACK (0x6474e551): A GNU extension used to indicate whether the stack should be executable. This segment has no contents. The dynamic linker sets the permission of the stack in memory to the permissions of this segment.
* PT_GNU_RELRO (0x6474e552): A GNU extension which tells the dynamic linker to set the given address and size to be read-only after applying dynamic relocations. This is used for const variables which require dynamic relocations.

ELF Sections

Now that we’ve done segments, lets take a quick look at the details of ELF sections. ELF sections are more complicated than segments, in that there are more types of sections. Every ELF object file, and most ELF executables and shared libraries, have a table of sections. The first entry in the table, section 0, is always a null section.

ELF sections have several fields.

Name.
* Type. I discuss section types below.
* Flags. I discuss section flags below.
* Address. This is the address of the section. In an object file this is normally zero. In an executable or shared library it is the virtual address. Since executables are normally accessed via segments, this is essentially documentation.
* File offset. This is the offset of the contents within the file.
* Size. The size of the section.
* Link. Depending on the section type, this may hold the index of another section in the section table.
* Info. The meaning of this field depends on the section type.
Address alignment. This is the required alignment of the section. The program linker uses this when laying out the section in memory.
* Entry size. For sections which hold an array of data, this is the size of one data element.
These are the types of ELF sections which the program linker may see.

* SHT_NULL: A null section. Sections with this type may be ignored.
* SHT_PROGBITS: A section holding bits of the program. This is an ordinary section with contents.
* SHT_SYMTAB: The symbol table. This section actually holds the symbol table itself. The section contents are an array of ELF symbol structures.
* SHT_STRTAB: A string table. This type of section holds null-terminated strings. Sections of this type are used for the names of the symbols and the names of the sections themselves.
* SHT_RELA: A relocation table. The link field holds the index of the section to which these relocations apply. These relocations include addends.
* SHT_HASH: A hash table used by the dynamic linker to speed symbol lookup.
* SHT_DYNAMIC: The dynamic tags used by the dynamic linker. Normally the PT_DYNAMIC segment and the SHT_DYNAMIC section will point to the same contents.
* SHT_NOTE: A note section. This is used in system dependent ways. A loadable SHT_NOTE section will become a PT_NOTE segment.
* SHT_NOBITS: A section which takes up memory space but has no associated contents. This is used for zero-initialized data.
* SHT_REL: A relocation table, like SHT_RELA but the relocations have no addends.
* SHT_SHLIB: This is not used as far as I know.
* SHT_DYNSYM: The dynamic symbol table. Normally the DT_SYMTAB dynamic tag will point to the same contents as this section (I haven’t discussed dynamic tags yet, though).
* SHT_INIT_ARRAY: This section holds a table of function addresses which should each be called at program startup time, or, for a shared library, when the library is opened by dlopen.
* SHT_FINI_ARRAY: Like SHT_INIT_ARRAY, but called at program exit time or dlclose time.
* SHT_PREINIT_ARRAY: Like SHT_INIT_ARRAY, but called before any shared libraries are initialized. Normally shared libraries initializers are run before the executable initializers. This section type may only be linked into an executable, not into a shared library.
* SHT_GROUP: This is used to group related sections together, so that the program linker may discard them as a unit when appropriate. Sections of this type may only appear in object files. The contents of this type of section are a flag word followed by a series of section indices.
* SHT_SYMTAB_SHNDX: ELF symbol table entries only provide a 16-bit field for the section index. For a file with more than 65536 sections, a section of this type is created. It holds one 32-bit word for each symbol. If a symbol’s section index is SHN_XINDEX, the real section index may be found by looking in the SHT_SYMTAB_SHNDX section.
* SHT_GNU_LIBLIST (0x6ffffff7): A GNU extension used by the prelinker to hold a list of libraries found by the prelinker.
* SHT_GNU_verdef (0x6ffffffd): A Sun and GNU extension used to hold version definitions (I’ll take about symbol versions at some point).
* SHT_GNU_verneed (0x6ffffffe): A Sun and GNU extension used to hold versions required from other shared libraries.
* SHT_GNU_versym (0x6fffffff): A Sun and GNU extension used to hold the versions for each symbol.
These are the types of section flags.

* SHF_WRITE: Section contains writable data.
* SHF_ALLOC: Section contains data which should be part of the loaded program image. For example, this would normally be set for a SHT_PROGBITS section and not set for a SHT_SYMTAB section.
* SHF_EXECINSTR: Section contains executable instructions.
* SHF_MERGE: Section contains constants which the program linker may merge together to save space. The compiler can use this type of section for read-only data whose address is unimportant.
* SHF_STRINGS: In conjunction with SHF_MERGE, this means that the section holds null terminated string constants which may be merged.
* SHF_INFO_LINK: This flag indicates that the info field in the section holds a section index.
* SHF_LINK_ORDER: This flag tells the program linker that when it combines sections, this section must appear in the same relative order as the section in the link field. This can be used to ensure that address tables are built in the expected order.
* SHF_OS_NONCONFORMING: If the program linker sees a section with this flag, and does not understand the type or all other flags, then it must issue an error.
* SHF_GROUP: This section appears in a group (see SHT_GROUP, above).
* SHF_TLS: This section holds TLS data.

## Symbol Versions

A shared library provides an API. Since executables are built with a specific set of header files and linked against a specific instance of the shared library, it also provides an ABI. If is desirable to be able to update the shared library independently of the executable. This permits fixing bugs in the shared library, and it also permits the shared library and the executable to be distributed separately. Sometimes an update to the shared library requires changing the API, and sometimes changing the API requires changing the ABI. When the ABI of a shared library changes, it is no longer possible to update the shared library without updating the executable. This is unfortunate.

For example, consider the system C library and the stat function. When file systems were upgraded to support 64 bit file offsets, it became necessary to change the type of some of the fields in the stat struct. This is a change in the ABI of stat. New versions of the system library should provide a stat which returns 64-bit values. But old existing executables call stat expecting 32-bit values. This could be addressed by using complicated macros in the system header files. But there is a better way.

The better way is symbol versions, which were introduced at Sun and extended by the GNU tools. Every shared library may define a set of symbol versions and assign specific versions to each defined symbol. The versions and symbol assignments are done by a script passed to the program linker when creating the shared library.

When an executable or shared library A is linked against another shared library B, and A refers to a Symbol S defined in B with a specific version, the undefined dynamic symbol reference S in A is given the version of the Symbol S in B. When the dynamic linker sees that A refers to a specific version of S, it will link it to that specific version of B. If B later introduces a new version of S, this will not affect A, as long as B continues to provide the old version of S.

For example, when stat changes, the C library would provide two versions of stat, one with the old version (eg, LIBC_1.0), and one with the new version (LIBC_2.0). The new version of stat would be marked as the default-the program linker would use it to satisfy references to stat in object files. Executables linked against the old version would require the LIBC_1.0 version of stat, and would therefore continue to work. Note that it is even possible for both versions of stat to be used in a single program, accessed from different shared libraries.

As you can seek, the version effectively is part of the name of the symbol. The biggest difference is taht a shared library can define a specific version which is used to satisfy an unversioned reference.

Versions can be used in an object file (this is a GNU extension to the original Sun implementation), This is useful for specifying versions without requiring a version script. When a symbol name contains the @ character, the string before the @ is the name of the symbol, and the string after the @ is the version. If there are two consecutive @ characters, then this is the default version.

## Relaxation

Generally the program linker does not change the contents other than applying relocations. However, there are some optimizations which the program linker can perform at link time. One of them is relaxation.

Relaxation is inherently processor specific. It consists of optimizing code sequences which can become smaller or more efficient when final addresses are known. The most common type of relaxation is for call instructions. A processor like the m68k supports different PC relative call instructions: one with a 16-bit offset, and one with 32-bit offset. When calling a function which is within range of the 16 bit offset, it is more efficient to use the shorter instruction. The optimization of shrinking these instructions at link time is known as relaxation.

Relaxation is applied based on relocation entries.The linker looks for relocations which may be relaxed, and checks whether they are in range. If they are, the linker applies the relaxation, probably shrinking the size of the contents. The relaxation can normally only be done when the linker recognizes the instruction being relocated. Applying a relaxation may in turn bring other relocations within range, so relaxation is typically done in a loop until there are no more opportunities.

When the linker relaxes a relocation in the middle of a contents, it may need to adjust any PC relative references which cross the point of the relaxation. Therefore, the assembler needs to generate relocation entries for all PC relative references. When not relaxing, these relocations may not be required, as a PC relative reference within a single contents will be valid whereever the contents winds up. When relaxing though, the linker needs to look through all the other relocations that apply to the contents, and adjust PC relatives one where appropriate. This adjustment will simply consist of recomputing the PC relative offset.

Of course it is also possible to apply relaxations which do  not change the size of the contents. For example, on the MIPS the position independent calling sequence is normally to load the address of the function into the $25 register and then to do an indirect call through the register. When the target of the call is within  the 18-bit range of the branch and call instruction, it is normally more efficient to use branch and call, since then the processor does not have to wait for the load of $25 to complete before starting the call. This relaxations changes the instruction sequence without changing the size.

## Parallel linking

It is possible to parallelize the linking process somewhat. This can help hide I/O latency and can take better advantage of modern multi-core systems.

The first area which can be parallelized is reading the symbols and relocation entries of all the input files. The symbols must be processed in order; otherwise, it will be difficult for the linker to resolve multiple definition correctly. In particular all the symbols which are used before an archive must be fully processed before the archive is processed, or the linker won't know which members of the archive to include in the link. However, despite these ordering requirements, it can be beneficial to do the actual I/O in parallel.

After all the symbols and relocations have been read, the linker must complete the layout of all the input contents. Most of this can not be done in parallel, as setting the location of one type of contents requires knowing the size of all the preceding types of contents. While doing the layout, the linker can determine the final location in the output file of all the data which needs to be written out.

After layout is complete, the process of reading the contents, applying relocations and writing contents to the output file can be fully parallelized. Each input file can be processed separately.

Since the final size of the output file is know after the layout phase, it is possible to use mmap for the output file. When not doing relaxation, it is then possible to read the input contents directly into place in the output file, and to relocation them in place. This reduces the number of system calls required and ideally will permit the operating system to do optimal disk I/O for the output file.